time I'm really excited for this talk
this is uh one of my academic Heroes and
somebody whose books have really
inspired me um over the past couple
years coming up next we have a
presentation
um coming up next we have a presentation
from Wendy Chun uh Wendy is Simon Fraser
University's Canada 150 research chair
in New Media and leads the digital
democracies Institute she's the author
of several Works including
discriminating data which is forthcoming
this year
um and more and three other books at MIT
press including updating Jermaine the
same habitual new media program and uh
programmed Vision software and memory
and finally my personal favorite control
and Freedom Power and paranoia in the
age of fiber optics this book was really
instrumental in all of the framing of
this Festival
um from the really realist approach that
she takes to this dynamic between the
possibility and the limitation of New
Media
she has been professor and chair of the
Department of modern culture and media
at Brown University where she worked for
almost two decades and she has held
numerous visiting chairs and fellowships
from institutions such as Harvard the
nnn the Annenberg school at the
University of Pennsylvania The Institute
for advanced study at Princeton the
Guggenheim ACLS and American Academy of
Berlin she is also Pi on several grants
including one from the UK Canada AI
initiative and with that we're gonna
turn it over to Wendy and hear more
about her latest work
hello everyone
gray area
fill in to offer you a sneak preview of
my forthcoming book discriminating data
today I'm speaking to you from my home
in Boston so I want to acknowledge that
I'm on the territory of the
Massachusetts and their neighbors the
wampanag and the nip Muk peoples and I
extend my respect to the citizens of
these nations who live here today and
their ancestors who have lived here for
over 500 Generations
I also want to acknowledge that my land
acknowledgment like all others is a
small gesture
a small gesture that in Canada at least
is part of an ongoing Truth and
Reconciliation process
a process however flawed and faltering
and believe me it is flawed and
faltering to face the violent truths of
settler colonialism such as the horrific
residential school system
a process to move towards decolonization
reparations and Reconciliation a process
of reconciliation that speaks to some of
the aims of this year's gray area
Festival
um to imagine new relational ontologies
Beyond utopian and fatalistic World
Views to Pro to build practical
realities together to build planetary
scale cooperation and solutions that
move Beyond technological promises
because relying on Purely technological
promises is and has been and will always
be a dead end a dead end in which
anything is possible yet nothing seems
to change and what I'll outline today is
the sense that anything is possible yet
nothing seems to change which the
festival organizers emphasize isn't
accidental if nothing seems to change
it's because
um social media networks and predictive
programs as they're currently formed and
implemented embed within themselves past
mistakes past mistakes such as
segregation internment and Eugenics and
by doing so they make it difficult to
live and to imagine different worlds
okay so to make this clear let's engage
in a collective thought experiment
so imagine or recall an image of a
Mythic yet flawed past I'll Supply a few
here's the so-called perfect white
Suburban nuclear family living in a
segregated plant community in which
everything's the same
your images
of U.S celebrities which are the
training set for many facial recognition
systems and here are images of Japanese
American children allegedly happily
educated in internment camps during
World War II
so imagine that this deep fake past has
become the only past
So Gone are images of civil rights
protests integrated schools and
cross-racial friendships
now imagine a world and nothing could
change from this deep Faith past because
learning and Truth became repeating this
deep fake past
got it
this is the nightmare scenario a
predictive machine learning
this is the world that we need to use
ariela azulize terms to unlearn to
unlearn Not By ignoring history but by
engaging it differently and potentially
because Within These Concepts and
defaults lie other worlds and
possibilities and helping us listen to
these other worlds as Cara killing urges
us to do is what drives discriminating
data
so most generally discriminating data
explores how data analytics and machine
learning create agitated clusters of
comforting rage by encoding legacies of
eugenics segregation and discrimination
by taking on these issues discriminating
data is in dialogue with the many recent
books and articles written by Kathy
O'Neill Sophia Noble ruha Benjamin
Meredith Broussard Kate Crawford
Virginia Eubanks and so many others
discriminating data does five basic
things the first is to expose and
investigate how ignoring differences
amplifies discrimination so how ignoring
race ignorantly promotes racism
and every day we hear about a new
instance of what Kathy O'Neal has called
a weapon of mass destruction Sophia
Noble has called algorithms of
Oppression and ruha Benjamin has called
the new gym code from discriminatory
predictive policing and risk assessment
programs to unfair hiring programs and
the classic example of this which almost
everybody mentions his Compass
um Compass is a software program used by
some U.S courts to predict the risk risk
of recidivism
so inmates and law enforcement fill out
a questionnaire and Compass spits out a
score based on their answers and the
score is factored in by some courts
during sentencing and parole
now the problem is that Compass has been
shown to be biased against racial
minorities and here you see the cover of
the award-winning propublica article on
compass
now what researchers whom pro-publica
Drew from were able to show is that
although Compass doesn't overtly use
racial categories doing so is illegal it
uses categories that are proxies for
race in the United States and here you
see an analysis produced by The Marshall
Project and here you see how races link
to factors such as education and
employment
now some have argued that these factors
aren't as important as others that age
and dirty data play a larger role than
these proxies
but this doesn't mean that compasses
predictions are racist if you consider
the over and under policing of certain
neighborhoods in the United States and
Canada age at time of rest and dirty
data you have to be in the database in
order to be miscribed like as well as
education and employment status are
proxies for racism if not race and it's
absolutely key that we think through
proxies for racism
um crucially Compass was initially sold
as solving the problem of racism by
eradicating individual human bias
as if racism was an individual human
bias problem
so we shouldn't be surprised that things
have turned out so poorly and rewriting
political and social problems as one's
on technology can and should solve never
goes well
this hopeful ignorance isn't new and the
failures of this hopeful ignorance
aren't new
these hopes and failures also Drive
fears over the AI apocalypse
AI is so threatening because right now
ai and surveillance devices are sold as
modern day servants or slaves
and this framing with all of its baggage
right
so what could go wrong in a society run
by servants or slaves
provokes fears of them as our masters
these fears and dreams are as January
has pointed out profoundly raced
engendered and one thing I do in the
book is to address these two sides of
hopeful ignorance together because the
best way to avoid an AI apocalypse is to
treat everyone and everything with
respect to follow the kambahu river
collectors call to treat everyone as
levally human and to follow the
indigenous protocols call for us to make
kin with our machines
because freedom is only Freedom if it's
freedom for all and what we have to
remember is that these current anxieties
over Ai and discriminatory algorithms
can open up opportunities for coalitions
and political action on civil rights and
civil liberties groups for instance came
together to take on facial recognition
technology
the second thing discriminating data
does is to interrogate default
assumptions in axioms that ground
algorithms in data structures so very
briefly because it's impossible to
summarize five years of research into 20
20 minutes
um in the book I map out how overblown
promises about correlation ties 21st
century data
analytics to early 20th century
um Eugenics I also show how homophily
the notion that similarity breeds
connection ties social networks to U.S
residential segregation so that Echo
Chambers aren't an accident their goal
in fact as I'll discuss a little more
later the very term homophily which
launders hate into love
comes from studies of post-world War II
U.S residential segregation so
segregation here is the ground truth the
goal of these recommender systems
I also look how authenticity how
deviations and transgressions ground
training and transparency
um so right now we're constantly called
on to be authentic by revealing some
intimate yet Open Secret about us
um an Open Secret that makes us
different from some others
um that makes us real
um and these open Secrets are valuable
because they're used to Cluster us to
put us in network neighborhoods with
people like us who agitate and charge us
um and one of my main points is that
networks magnetize and disintegrate
masses by divining and amplifying open
Secrets and then consolidating these
angry clusters of sameness around a
common enemy so that now we become
predictable not by following the
mainstream not by following Norms but
rather by deviating slightly from the
norm with others
and lastly discriminating data looks at
how recognition from facial recognition
technology to the radical rights Embrace
of the politics of recognition Builds on
discrimination on a powerful and
poisonous Liberation Envy so that those
who seek to deny others their civil
rights now disidentify with and as civil
rights Heroes
the third thing I do is try to grasp the
past present and future machine learning
puts in place by focusing on when why
and how their predictions work what's
key again is that in machine learning
truth equals consistency the future
equals the past
in other words learning is parsimonious
repetition
so the problem with machine learning as
it currently exists as it currently
exists is in simply that it's often
trained on dirty or highly selective
data again Hollywood celebrities lie at
the heart of many facial recognition
technology training sets and here you
see so-called deep fakes produced using
this set
the problem isn't simply as this example
of Hollywood stars as ground truth makes
clear that ground truth equals deep fake
but that these so-called predictive
programs are verified as true only if
they reproduce this data so Compass like
all predictive machine learning programs
wasn't tested on its ability to predict
the future but rather validated on its
ability to predict the past so past data
that was hidden during the training
phase or out of um set data so in these
models truth equals consistent
repetition and this matters because
these programs don't simply predict the
future they also determine the future
so risk assessments and software such as
Compass cement and amplify inequalities
through their decisions
so that these programs these programs
are disruptive if they are not because
they make possible new unforeseen
Futures but because they shut down the
future they make it repeat a deep think
past by automating rather than learning
from past mistakes
okay
so if this is so what can we do
well step four is to use existing AI
systems to diagnose current inequalities
to keep the future open to create a more
just and Democratic future we need to be
a little perverse we need to read the
discriminatory results of these
algorithms Against the Grain as evidence
of past discrimination Amazon for
example stopped using its secret hiring
algorithm a few years ago because it was
shown to discriminate against women
apparently have had women anywhere in
your CD like women's chess club you lost
points
but rather than simply discarding these
programs and they certainly should not
be used to determine hiring decisions
what if we use them as evidence right so
almost every Amazon hiring decision
during a certain period was probably
used to train this program so what if we
thank them for meticulously documenting
their discrimination
what if we use these programs with all
their limitations as historical tools as
theoretical probes
in other words what if we treated them
like global climate change models so
global climate change models show us a
likely future based on the past not so
we'll accept that future but so will
change it and global climate change
models may clear the difference between
being true
and being correct
the point of a global climate change
model isn't validation it isn't to
determine how accurate any given
prediction is the point rather is to act
in such a way that we don't have to
validate these predictions
so when a model um the point in other
words is not to produce this graph and
when a model we believe in shows a two
percent increase in mean temperature we
seek to fix the world not the model
and this should be our reaction to
Compass rather than trying to fix the
program we should try to fix the world
because what Compass actually shows us
is how racism Works through educational
and employment disparities
how racism is due to institutional
rather than individual bias right
Compass did get rid of individual bias
yet racism remains
now the problem with global climate
change models of course is that we've
known they're true for a very long time
but nothing's happened right which
raises the question do we really need
more models for whom is global climate
change news
and more importantly how can we avoid
producing models that document the
obvious that document the obvious and
that service Alibis for inaction
so so step five the ultimate goal is to
create different worlds different
algorithms different relations that
Engage The richness of relations and
knowledge unfolding around us
and to do so it takes up Cara killing's
call to listen with others for the
Poetry the frames and the noise a world
is making
and in the book I argue that not only
the problems but the outlines of a
solution can emerge from in there
not because technology can solve
societal problems but because technology
in society are always fused together
and because the past history as azulite
insists isn't lost it isn't over it's
the space of potential if only we can
unlearn our exploitative relationship to
the past and engage with others not as
sources not as sources of information or
sources of data but rather as potential
companions
and so the book revisits and emphasizes
the populations that lie at the heart of
our networks and defaults residents of
Addison terrorists are biracial housing
project Japanese internment camps and
married student housing and MIT civil
rights activists slaves unruly women
workers at Western Electric housewives
in Decatur and Punishment averse mice to
name a few
okay
so what does this look like
well to return briefly to the article
and housing study that coined the term
homophily the Columbia borough of
Applied sociological research conducted
a study of two public housing projects
one was craftown a project that was
cooperatively owned of some 700 white
families in New Jersey and it had to be
all white because it was cooperatively
owned and the the laws around
housing loans at that time and Hilltown
a biracial low rent project of about 800
families in Western Pennsylvania
now the researchers didn't assume
homophily to be always true rather they
asked when does homophily or heterophili
happen and they coined both these terms
mothly and heterofilling
what they did find in the one article
they published is that status hemophily
wasn't generally true except for gender
and race and lazar's Walter Merton
argued that value homophily the sharing
of values drove the status homophily
and to proof this they concentrated on
the over selection of white liberals and
white illiberals where liberals meant
believing in biracial housing and
believing that the folks in Hilltown got
along ill liberals lead the Opposites
and ambivalence didn't believe
um in biracial housing projects but
admitted that
um people of both races got along in the
housing project they lived in
now to make this point to show that
values drove him awfully they actually
threw out the responses of black
residents because they said there were
too few illiberal or and ambivalent
black residents with friends so in the
world view values were racially bounded
in their subsequent analysis a model of
friendship formation they also ignored
the white ambivalence which was actually
the largest category of white residents
um
they never published the data for this
study
and if they did we would have seen that
the over selection of ill liberals in
real numbers wasn't statistically
significant
um the report which was written by
Merton Patricia West and Marie yahoda
also revealed that black and white
residents did have friends and
acquaintances of the other race in fact
this report was used as evidence for
desegregation
now again to come up with the term
homophily they ignored the responses of
the black residents but without these
black residents there would be no
clean lines of connection
so they lie within the white spaces that
make network connections possible they
lie in the gaps that make networks
possible and the history of networks is
filled with sociological studies of
others who ground our Concepts and make
connection possible even as they're made
to disappear such as Japanese Americans
who are interned in camps during World
War II and studying these internees was
crucial to the development of sentiment
analysis in particular using sentiment
analysis to deal with captive
communities
so these populations these connections
they're still there they inhabit
correlation homophily recognition and
authenticity we live in their enclosed
um and what were called
experimental spaces when we live in
social media and they reside with us and
touch us whenever we think with or
through these Concepts
so the question before us is
how might we reside with them
how might we reside with them thank you
welcome back everybody I'm so thrilled
to be here joined by Wendy
and bury through executive director at
gray area thank you guys both for for
being here today
um this presentation comes out of
Wendy's latest book it's called
discriminating data and so I'm super
excited to to talk about that with you I
mean before we you know talk too much
about some of the ideas that you
presented I mean I still need to like
chew through this homophily versus
heterophily in my head a little bit
um but I wanted to you know to start off
by getting some background on the book
in this research project and where it
came from
um you know it it clearly comes from a
longer lineage of your research practice
and you know other Publications and so
I'd love to hear kind of the story of
you know how you got started on this on
this project
yeah so
this came right after
um writing the three books on the
emergence of the internet
um and what I started thinking about
with this book in particular was um why
and how polarization
um and algorithmic defaults
um were operating so very much how is it
that what I identified as habits earlier
or cultural norms get embedded within
certain algorithmic structures and more
importantly if if and when they do what
can they show us so we can then change
culture and Society so part of it was to
say like why is it that recommendation
systems and social media networks
presume that similarity reads connection
when it's so clear around us that that
there are so many different types of
relationships
um how did that happen how did that get
Amplified and so part of it was reading
some of the foundational tests in
network science and digging through
footnotes and archives and just really
trying to understand why and how this
happened and then also to say because
there's so much that has been written
and you know it starred books started in
um what is it in diet uh
2016 when a lot of the the news about
discriminatory algorithms was coming out
and it became painfully clear that if
these algorithms were discriminatory it
wasn't because they were incorrect
acting incorrectly but actually because
they were functioning as they were
supposed to
um and so I tried to Think Through what
does that mean and if they are
functioning in the way they are what can
it reveal about our current state so
that we can intervene and imagine a
different world very much like global
climate change models let's treat these
as probability missions based on deep
things that will tell us what will
happen if we keep automating these deep
things
I mean it's it's certain I mean it's
it's it's
undeniable you know in terms of the
effect that it has in society and the
way that we're seeing uh people on
social networking platforms can be
organized the way that you know you I
mean I I'm constantly the one mixed by
tick tock's algorithm because it's so
sophisticated in creating and playing
both sides of this in a way like it you
know of create showing you things that
are similar to something being watched
or something that your phone heard you
say and then also doing kind of these
random moments of difference even though
they're getting those exact same moments
to millions of people around the world
and you kind of get this illusion of a
difference and the reason that you're
getting something that's outside of your
fear when it's it's it's
also you know it's a little bit
differently just
a little bit differently
um
in the context of recent whistleblowing
it's coming out of major social media
platforms you know this is these are
things that
have been by human hand seen witnessed
promoted continued not stopped
um and it's
I mean I want to say shocking but it
doesn't feel quite shocking anymore
um but it's it's horrifying nonetheless
yeah I mean one thing
interesting about the whistleblowers
um uh testimony and this goes back to
the question of homophone or similarity
um is that a lot of people have
Justified him often in terms of people
want to be or around people who are like
them it's comfortable but what's so
clear is that if you put a whole bunch
of people who are like together and you
do this based on open Secrets or stigma
what you'll have are agitated clusters
or comforting rate I mean that when they
did put um limit to friends and families
it got worse and it makes sense
um and so trying to think through that
and the different roles that we live in
every day
um is so key I also think that um what
you raised and that's so important is to
also try to think through when is when
it
how does how do we as characters fit
into the scripts that we're given
um because I'm sure you know Ben
grosser's work
um and Ben was um trying to play with
the tick tock algorithm like going with
different identities etc etc trying to
get something different to come out and
it was always the same
um and there's always there's an
interesting way in which with
personalization
often sometimes we think and becomes
like uh as Matthew Fuller was saying
these tarot cards that emerge right and
we're like oh that person it knew this
about me so that's why I chose this and
so we read into this some sort of deeper
understanding of ourselves then perhaps
is there like we closed the circuit
between what's given and what we imagine
we like in order to make it more and
more powerful and personalized
that's interesting I don't know if you
saw that
um
the end of this question is going to be
something about art and creativity but I
don't know if you saw the recent viral
video that was
um
a woman who was uh using the tick tock
algorithms uh preference for motion and
dance
to create an activist video so she was
saying things about you know
overthrowing capitalism and things like
that but dancing when she and it caused
the video to raise in the rankings which
so there's a role for creativity here
and I'm wondering I'm sort of reminded
in um and so here's the question is I
was really sort of
um
struck by this idea of how Technologies
really could foreclosing futures
as opposed to necessarily opening you
know opening them up and one of the
things that we're kind of up to at gray
area and you can see in the festival
curation is the role that artists play
in providing a counterbalance to that so
I'm wondering you're doing all this
great research I'm wondering in terms of
either dissemination or communication to
the public
um and I'm also reminded of like how
mcluhan contextualized uh artists as
like distant early warning you know like
culturally attuned and sensorial people
that are trained to inoculate the public
against this kind of thing if you in in
your from what you see how do you feel
art plays a role in
dealing with all these things that were
talking about here I think art is
Central but I think that not all artists
are the same and I don't think all art
is the same either in doing this and I
think there's a tendency sometimes I
mean it's really interesting because
especially theorists we tend to end with
the artist that we think is really
amazing that he works things and we
our covers are from them as well and
then artists turn to the theorists they
love and then have them as the framework
for them and so I think there's a really
interesting relationship there um but I
think that what what the most important
part that's being produced now does is
precisely make us uh resonate with the
worlds that exist and the possibilities
that exist not simply in the future but
now
um and I think that one thing that's
always been really key for me is to
reject both sides like so on one side
you know remember Time Magazine
2000 you are the person of the year
you're the internet you know this is all
driven by you and then 2018
you know Tech dude saying we destroyed
the internet we're sorry but we are the
internet right and you all are
marionettes
um so I think that between those
um is is exactly where things are lie
and for me again what's key is that
we're characters which means that we
don't necessarily always write the
script but we're actors as well there's
ways in which the script that we have
because it's based on correlation means
that it's based on everybody's else's
actions so for me what's really profound
and this is what some of the best New
Media artists do is that they make us
realize that when we are looking at
these little tiny screens when we think
that it's just me and the screen
um there's an entire different
technological structure that's in place
and that this entirely different
technological communication structure is
in place is actually a point of
possibility as well as a point of
intervention so I'm thinking of that
grocer but also Joanna moles work
Mongols really early work
um was quite brilliant in their
rewriting of the Photoshop interface so
in order to um in order to alter
um it's in order to alter an image you
had to change the class of the
individual from um to middle class
before you could apply the filters and
it was just a really smart hack of the
Photoshop interface but it made you
think through class and different ways
of operating so I think that that art
has always been key but also at the same
time we can't imagine that all art or
artists are the same no yeah and
I can tell you firsthand they certainly
are not
I'm pretty not sure about much but
um glad you brought up Ben grosser just
for the audience's awareness um Ben
grosser currently has a solo show up at
our bite Gallery in London um it's
really fabulous you can check it out
online our bite's a great uh arts and
Tech Gallery uh oh we'll drop the link
in the chat as well
we have we let off this festival with a
great conversation between Ben Bratton
and uh Audrey Tang
um and Audrey said some really
interesting I wish we we could have that
conversation could have gone for four
hours actually it was it was fantastic
but I'm wondering um
Audrey's position
is very I mean uh it's very open source
Centric you know free Culture open
source
um and I understand certainly the role
of Open Source in making the technology
behind things transparent uh that's
clear but but it seems
um
it's hard to think that that well I
guess what's the question do you feel
that that's a necessary but not
sufficient step
towards combating some of the you know
biases and technology that you're
talking about or how does it play you
know what what way do you think about
that in terms of potential responses I
think the most profound critiques of
Open Source that are sympathetic have
come from um indigenous data sovereignty
folk
um and as a lot of people have pointed
out the problem with the notion of Open
Source which is everything is freely
available is it's often been based on
taking other people's stuff taking other
people's genomes taking other there's a
certain colonialist logic that's still
embedded within the notion that
everything can be an open source
um and if you consider say
um some of the work by someone like
Ariella azulai who is trying to get us
to Think Through History not in terms of
people being sources but being
companions
um it makes you think of the indigenous
protocol for artificial intelligence and
the focus on making kin with our
machines there's a profound difference
between viewing things and people
through the realm of Open Source and
viewing them through the realm of
companions
I mean that's so I mean that's so
important and I think speaks to a lot of
the things also that have been discussed
over the course of the festival related
to relationships to non-human beings or
and non-living beings
um you know the elements around us shape
you know it's something that I've been
saying this is the beginning of the
festival is that you know protocol is
everything gravity is a protocol you
know that's something that writes a
script that defines how we walk how we
move how we feel our bodies which is you
know our sensory perception to lead to
everything and I really like your
description of people as characters uh
you know and you and and and and scripts
uh being written I mean I I and I think
that this is so you know I think a lot
of people you know look at technology as
being separate from their life we hear a
lot of The Duality between the IRL and
the URL and kind of everything in
between and people are like oh Mark
Zuckerberg is doing this you know
whatever like that's not part of my life
but you know software you know as not to
you know that's a quote the the closet
but you know software is a layer that
permeates all of society and every
aspect of our live experience is now
being framed and interfaced through
these kinds of constructions through
algorithmic environments
um and you know I'm wondering
how
what I mean I think that you know you
mentioned the the indigenous artificial
intelligence protocol
um you know as making kinwith machines
is one possible way forward to escape
from the the tyranny of algorithmic
control what else you know what other
strategies or what ways can can people
technologists artists you know average
citizens who might feel like they don't
have a role in The Script how can they
play how can they do something or engage
in this conversation in a way that
perhaps restores agency is that is that
even possible
yeah I mean that's such a huge question
I mean there's so many different ways
into it one is to understand that if the
profound effect that technology is
having on our our bodies and our on us
has everything to do with the fact that
humans are creative so if you think of
um things in terms of uh Technology's
influence on us in terms of our habits
and our habitual way of being habits are
second nature habits point to the fact
that humans create another nature and so
to think through our habits and the ways
in which these habits are Central to our
negotiation and our embedding of
technology so even when we're not using
an interface it's affected us like if we
think even how the notion of friending
has changed profoundly whether on or
offline or how we conceive our habitual
way of being I think that's how you get
at some of the ways in which technology
has affected us even when we're not
um directly in front of our computers
but I think but because it is at the
habitual level that points to extreme
human creativity
um that's Central there's a there's a
way in which this is um implies an
embodiment in a relationship and for me
what's always key is to think through
again the ways in which correlation is
correlation so if your computer is is
operating right now it's because it's
downloading everybody else's traffic and
then not and then actively deleting
what's not directly addressed to you the
ways our Technologies and our
connections operate are by constantly
opening us up to others that are then
closed by these interfaces that we
somehow accept as our machines so I
think part of it is to think through the
richness of connection
and as a way in to to understanding the
kinds of agency and the kinds of roles
that we are already playing
um and then to always realize that this
these things have been engineered a
certain way that we can question how
things are are done we can think through
not just regulation of all the
regulations is certainly important not
safely Norms but also and more
importantly a Poetics of Engagement and
being and a habit of being with our
Technologies
you know in Justice which you know Focus
too much but I think
part of this you know you were
mentioning earlier about the Deep fake
past and that resonated with a lot of
audience members
um and and myself as well I mean it's
it's a metaphor that is not even a
metaphor it's just true and I you know I
I was grateful for that kind of you know
framing because I think it helps to
understand you know how narratives have
been told
um we've been talking a lot at the
festival as well about incorporating
ancestral knowledge incorporating
history and tradition into these
codified places
um in ways that are meaningful and
uphold them and then by in turn by
becoming a part of those ecosystems
change them either purely by their
presence
um and you know you you were talking a
lot in the presentation about the the
the relationship between the past and
the future
um and I was wondering if you could
expand a little bit more on the ways
that those two things converge and what
that means for us is we kind of go
forward in this very uncertain uncertain
time
yeah so right now what's most dangerous
about
um these automatic systems is the ways
in which they can because they're built
on on things like eugenic understandings
of the future
um they seek to make the future uh
simply repeat the past right truth is
consistent repetition the problem is
that the path they draw on is
fundamentally deep fake and not
repeating the Deep Faith becomes true
um and part of what I'm trying to
understand is again if we view these as
mirrors like if we if we look at
something like compass and say rather
than let's fix the model so we have a
good risk assessment
um unlocked cool whatever that would be
um what if we use that as a mirror for
everything that's wrong with our current
justice system and then from there seek
to fix the world
not the model
um there's a way in which the past that
are offered or and the Futures that are
offered
um give us ways to understand the gap
between what we want the future to look
like and what we need the future to look
like in order for it to be inhabitable
and where we're heading
um given the Logics that were embedded
in so I think that again and this goes
to the question about agency I think
that the question that we should ask
about a lot of these systems isn't
simply let's fix these Technologies but
how can we fix the world and that gets
to those questions of the ancestral
knowledge and also different ways and
modes of being because if we focus
simply on fixing these Technologies then
when we fixed
um because a lot of times they're
working correctly
um and what they reveal is the ways in
which what's accepted as
the past is a deep faith
um in in they show us the dangers of
accepting that so I do think that
thinking through this is a mirror and a
point of intervention is absolutely key
to to moving forward
hmm it's it's I I mean I love the I
think the the the the use of the word
mirror is really key here you know we're
reflecting values of our society we're
reflection with our society
um you know in thinking about you know
the way that interfaces affect people
I'm you know that it never fails it
never escapes me that we work on
desktops with files and folders in an
extremely white white collar
um work environment and that has deeply
permeated all of our subconsciousnesses
as you said on a very habitual habitual
level yeah I wouldn't say that that's
probably one of the intervention points
for art
is you know you have these medias that
are potentially correctly uh
revealing biases inherent in our world
or injustices and we have to keep that
media that can conditions and constructs
our reality from just amplifying those
biases into the world and so there needs
to be some intervention in the middle of
that and I think that's one of the ways
arts and culture can get in the middle
of that and show how to because
otherwise it would just be a feedback
loop that you know you have to pop out
of the system in some way or another
several years ago in 2017 we had Gene
Youngblood at the festival and his and
it is an interesting question for you
his his conclusion ended up being this
idea that was secession from the
broadcast
and he was just like you got to get out
you know we have this homogeneous media
sphere and like you gotta opt out and
then it's it's one of the big dialogues
that versus like no the only way out is
through you have to engage with this
stuff and deal with technology and
helping you know that's the that's the
path right I don't know if you have a
thought like how do you know yeah how do
you exit from this
conditioning sphere in a way that
besides read you know reading ruhi
Benjamin's book reading your book
reading Sophia Noble's book you know
there's an education portion but I don't
know if there's any way for someone
that's
in the middle of this system how do you
trust the information that's coming at
you
when it could be reflecting just like a
truth or you know how do you trust it
oh I think
I think though if we don't need to have
and I think that that's one thing we
need to move away from is if those were
the the two
um especially because exit if you think
about the people talking about that's it
right now I think it's uh they're out
they're out yeah yeah so I set up I set
up a dichotomy for you to synthesize in
the middle of yeah I think that um
what's key though when you said how do
you know what to trust I mean what's
interesting to me right now is that a
lot of people are saying well the issue
is you know people aren't trusting the
institutions that they used to trust and
this is why we're in the problems we're
in right and my point is is always that
democracy has depended on people
questioning
um and that the issue isn't that people
are questioning things the things are
that become dangerous is when mistrust
of something like CNN leads you to you
to completely trust Epoch times like
it's not actually questioning that's the
issue it's where people land
um and I think that having this constant
question means so you don't land and
you're able to Think Through
Alternatives
um is absolutely key and I think here
you know things like global climate
change models again like they show us a
future not so that we'll accept it but
so we'll try to change it and I think
that if we look again with through this
lens of a probe on all these programs
and say that they show us what will be
unless we intervene and we need to
interview and here I think again the
ways in which civil rights and civil
liberties groups have come together to
intervene into facial recognition
technology shows us the power that can
come from questioning these results that
become so painfully clear when their
algorithm rhythmically expressed so that
people who before didn't seem to care
about issues of racial discrimination
now do
um I think that this is a moment for
opportunity precisely because that gap
between prediction and reality will
always be there and that Gap is always
the space for political and artistic
intervention
wow um
um I mean it's one thing that I think
looks like a roadblock to me
um and that is an issue that I've never
totally been able to wiggle out from is
the opacity of all of it you know in in
your books you talk about uh oh sorry
there's just a truck going past my
window
um
so sorry about that but um you know you
for instance you and you mentioned this
earlier the way that information Pocket
Data pocket switches in our in our
Hardware that's a certain protocol that
as you as you said you know brings out a
lot it really opens us up in ways that
we're not even aware of you know we can
see the results of racist algorithms and
we can see the you know we can see the
the cultural impacts of you know a white
frame of technological frame of mind you
know determining what these interfaces
look like but we can't understand how
the algorithm works it's almost too
complex to fully comprehend I mean and
you know the classic example is you know
the Google search algorithm and that you
know no single person knows how it works
it's been cobbled together and amended
and changed so many different times you
know I I'm always I always have found
you know uh ethnographies of software
companies really rich in that sense
because most of them demonstrate that
these teams are so distributed that even
you know at any given time one person is
only working on one tiny piece and
there's no real grasp of the whole
puzzle so even for creators even for the
builders the writers of these scripts
you know it's very very difficult to to
fully see through all of the different
layers you know let alone the Casual
internet user you know and you know I
think you know even as media theorists
we're a little bit more tuned in but you
know but even the average person who
isn't like critically thinking about
this all the time but it's just a user
um you know for their life you know how
how do we overcome this opacity is that
something that
you see I don't know maybe it's not as
big of a problem as I as I'm laying out
but to me that's something that I've
grappled with a lot
we really need to
need to come the opacity
then we could intervene into them I mean
we don't know how many things in this
world work right I don't know you're
opaque to me yet we're having this
conversation and I believe that we're
making interventions into
um each other
um I think that other people like moment
about Malik has really made the
important point that if we consider
transparency in relationship to these
programs to be in terms of understanding
the machine is what the machine is doing
as opposed to the relationship between
the machine and what it's supposed to
represent
then we've lost the battle
um and then there are other people like
Cynthia Rudin who are coming up with
explainable machine learning models that
come up with many of the same results of
these more complicated ones to or in
order to understand how they operate and
that's key as well but I you know I
think please thought is Right opacity is
Central to relationship and
relationality and why is it that we
believe our machine should be
transparent to us like what is it about
that relationship that we fundamentally
believe that these machines should be
transparent when we don't expect that
from the rest of the world and if we can
understand that maybe opacity isn't
what's causing domination and
discrimination but there's actually
something that's completely obvious
that's causing discrimination and
domination
um I wonder sometimes when the the
discussion around transparency becomes
an alibi for us not to deal with these
other things because we're focused on
this thing as if if we only knew this
then we could intervene and I also think
that people overplay what we don't know
I mean a lot of these tools they're not
rocket science a lot of these basic
mathematical concepts are well known
they're used in different ways but it's
the same way you know people used to say
about people said global climate change
is going to happen but 100 hundreds of
years ago based on just how hot house
gases operate it didn't take all these
models it was a fundamental formula that
could predict this not in all its
particularities but the fundamental
Trend and so I wonder why it is that we
we let ourselves think that because we
don't know this and we get as long as by
the fact that we don't know this but
somehow this means that it we don't act
it seems like even rocket science isn't
rocket science anymore okay
anybody can get in the game these days
you know you know that's a really that's
a really refreshing approach uh Wendy
and it gives me a lot of hope it makes
me feel a lot better about something
that has given me you know that I've
been you know wrestling with for for a
while
um and I mean it's it's you know
to use a very you know a somewhat recent
example I'm just reminded of it's
interesting in contrast with what social
media companies what technology
platforms attempt to sell to you
transparency right like you have this
online profile you have this verified
identity and now we're getting into the
crypto space where blockchains verify
every transaction that make it immutable
and clear
um and it's just I just find that to be
such an interesting tension because as
we saw in things like you know Dave
Eggers the circle for instance you know
what what this idea of radical
transparency can actually generate which
is ultimately deeply damaging
um in so many different ways uh so
that's not oh it's total it's like the
demand for real names it's somehow going
to make bullying go away as opposed to
realizing that actually real names makes
bullying a lot more effective
yeah
totally absolutely
um we're generally I'm looking at the
clock here yeah we're just about at it
we're a little bit overtime
um but you know I could talk to you for
six hours Wendy and you know I I really
appreciate you sharing some insights in
your new book uh it's not quite out yet
do you have a release date uh um so I
just got my author copy so it's right
here um it's I think it's coming out
November
um second or fifth
Saturday and what's the publisher
um MIT MIT press
yeah grab a copy guys I can't even do it
now before it's gone on pre-order
if I as soon as I get a discount code
I'm going to send it to everyone
the world well thank you for inviting me
this is such a great thank you so much
thank you so much for being here Wendy
um you know I couldn't think about I
couldn't do a festival about protocol
without inviting you it would just feel
so wrong
so thank you so so much for being here
we really appreciate your insights
great thank you
see you and good luck with everything
yeah thank you do